# Against Bitrot (How & why I rebuilt my blog)

> The Jargon File, a compendium of hacker lore, defines “bit rot” as a jocular explanation for the degradation of a software program over time even if “nothing has changed”; the idea behind this is almost as if the bits that make up the program were subject to radioactive decay.
>
> — [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_rot)

This post is a late-night rant that gives this new blog’s motivation and high-level details.

## Rant (the ‘why’)
The story started four years ago when I built my [Gatsby-based blog](https://elvischidera.com). It was based on a “minimalist” template, and the result was beautiful right out of the box.

To this day, 99.9% of my changes were to the blog content written in Markdown. I didn’t touch the codebase. I didn’t need to, as I didn’t need anything else.

As the number of content grew, I noticed the build started to get slower. Well, this goes with the territory, and I didn’t care much as I could easily preview my changes in my code editor. Builds only need to run on Github actions, and I didn’t care how long that took.

Fast forward to two days ago: the last straw was that I couldn’t longer build my blog locally. I was hit with numerous warnings and errors every time I tried.

Why is this failing? Last I checked, Markdown, HTML, CSS, and Javascript haven’t changed significantly. My requirements from 4 years ago have stayed the same. So, what gives?

I decided to have a look behind the veil. Lo and behold! I found my blog has **1537** dependencies!!! Why do I need `multicast-dns`? Or any one of the other 1500 dependencies?

Bruv! I just want to write in Markdown and have it show up on the internet. I don’t want to be a “professional engineer” on a side project — if I wanted that, I’d return to work.

I was shouldering the maintenance burden of dependencies I didn’t actually need. This large surface area maximized my exposure to bit rot.

## New blog setup (th’ ‘h’w'Let’s's review my requirements from four years ago, which hasn’t changed:
1. Convert Markdown (CommonMark) to HTML.
2. Provide syntax highlighting for code blocks.
3. Support for LaTeX.
4. A simple method for deploying the static blog.
5. A minimalist design (content is king).
6. I don’t want to tinker with the codebase unless necessary.

I am confident these requirements will remain unchanged for the next 5 years. Therefore, I just need to find a tool that is resilient to bit rot. Unfortunately, most Markdown blogging tools are more complex than I need. They often offer features I don’t need or sacrifice simplicity for flexibility.

Fortunately, I stumbled upon this [blog template](https://github.com/gordonnl/markdown-blog-template). The last commit was five years ago (older than my blog), and when I pulled it, it worked locally without any hassle.

Parfait! According to the Lindy Effect, this tool should last another five years. Here’s how it functions:

It reads all the Markdown files in a `src` directory and converts them into HTML files in a `dest` directory. It comes with a simple CSS file in the `dest` directory for essential styling and uses the `marked` library for Markdown to HTML conversion, along with `hiIt’sght.js` for syntax highlighting.

It’s that simple! This template was more resilient to bit rot because:
1. It has only two dependencies.
2. Both are bundled locally.
3. The setup is incredibly simple.

I decided to use this as the basis for my new blog with the following changes:
1. Added LaTeX support using `Katex`.
2. Implemented functionality to list all blog posts on the index page by year.
3. Updated the CSS to match my preferences.
4. Created a simple script for deploying to GitHub Pages.
5. Finally, I updated the `marked` and `highlight.js` libraries to the latest versions. I committed my `node_modules` to the repository to keep the dependencies local.

The build script consists of ~100 lines of pure JavaScript. It is so simple that I could rewrite it in an hour if needed.

I rely on standard features from Markdown, HTML, CSS, and Javascript, which will likely stay the same in the coming years. If any of my third-party dependencies rot, I can easily replace them with something else or choose not to update them.

## Conclusion
I’m pleased with my new blog setup. It is simple, fast, and resilient to bit rot. Now, I can focus on creating content without incurring unnecessary maintenance costs.

That starter pack or boilerplate template might help you start quickly, but it often conceals unnecessary complexity. You don’t need a rocket ship to go grocery shopping.

Time is precious! Spend it on what truly matters.